{WARNING: do not edit, file automatically generated by lpdoc}

1 INSTALLATION_CIAO_Win32
*************************

This describes the installation of Ciao after downloading the Windows
_binary_ (i.e., _precompiled_) distribution. It includes the
installation of libraries and manuals and applies to Windows
95/98/NT/2000/XP systems. This is the simplest Windows installation,
since it requires no compilation and is highly recommended. However,
it is also possible to compile Ciao from the source distribution on
these systems (please refer to *note Installing Ciao from the source
distribution:: for details).

If you find any problems during installation, please refer to *note
Troubleshooting (nasty messages and nifty workarounds)::.  See also
*note Downloading new versions:: and *note Reporting bugs::.

Top
***

Win32 binary installation summary
=================================

Please follow these steps (below we use the terms _folder_ and
_directory_ interchangeably):

  1. Download the precompiled distribution and unpack it into any
     suitable folder, such as, e.g., `C:\Program Files'.

     This will create there a folder whose name reflects the Ciao
     version. Due to limitations of Windows related to file
     associations, do not put Ciao too deep in the folder hierarchy.
     For unpacking you will need a recent version of a zip archive
     manager - there are many freely available such as `WinZip',
     `unzip', `pkunzip', etc. (see for example `www.winzip.com').
     Some users have reported some problems with version 6.2 of
     WinZip, but no problems with, e.g., version 7. With WinZip,
     simply click on "Extract" and select the extraction folder as
     indicated above.

  2. Stop any Ciao-related applications.

     If you have a previous version of Ciao installed, make sure you
     do not have any Ciao applications (including, e.g., a toplevel
     shell) running, or the extraction process may not be able to
     complete. You may also want to delete the entire folder of the
     previous installation to save space.

  3. Open the Ciao source directory created during extraction and run
     (e.g. by double-clicking on it) the `install'(`.bat') script.
     Answer "yes" to the dialog that pops up and type any character
     in the installation window to finish the process. You may need
     to reboot for the changes in the registry to take effect.

     This will update the windows registry (the file `ciao'(`.reg')
     lists the additions) and also create some `.bat' files which may
     be useful for running Ciao executables from the command line. It
     also creates initialization scripts for the `emacs' editor. The
     actions performed by the installation script are reported in the
     installation window.

  4. You may want to add a _windows shortcut_  in a convenient place,
     such as the desktop, to `ciaosh.cpx', the standard interactive
     toplevel shell. It is located inside the `shell' folder (e.g.,
     click on the file `ciaosh.cpx' with the right mouse button and
     select the appropriate option, `Send to->Desktop as shortcut').

  5. You may also want to add another shortcut to the file
     `ciao'(`.html') located inside `doc\reference\ciao_html' so that
     you can open the Ciao manual by simply double-clicking on this
     shortcut.

  6. Finally, if the (freely available) `emacs' editor/environment is
     not installed in your system, we _highly recommend_ that you
     also install it at this point. While it is easy to use Ciao with
     any editor of your choice, the Ciao distribution includes a very
     powerful  _application development environment_ which is based
     on `emacs' and which enables, e.g., source-level debugging,
     syntax coloring, context-sensitive on-line help, etc. If you are
     not convinced, consider that many programmers inside Micros*ft
     use `emacs' for developing their programs.

     The emacs editor (in all its versions: Un*x, Windows, etc.) can
     be downloaded from, for example, `http://www.emacs.org/', and
     also from the many GNU mirror sites worldwide (See
     `http://www.gnu.org/' for a list), in the `gnu/emacs' and
     `gnu/windows/emacs' directories. You can find answers to
     frequently asked questions (FAQ) about `emacs' in general at
     `http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/emacs-faq.text' and about the
     Windows version at
     `http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/windows/ntemacs.html'
     (despite the `ntemacs' name it runs fine also as is on Win9X and
     Win2000 machines).

     You need to tell `emacs' how to load the Ciao mode automatically
     when editing and how to access the on-line documentation:

        * Start `emacs' (double click on the icon or from the `Start'
          menu). Open (menu `Files->Open File' or simply <^X><^F>)
          the file `ForEmacs.txt' that the installation script has
          created in directory where you installed the Ciao
          distribution.

        * Copy the lines in the file (select with the mouse and then
          menu `Edit->Copy'). Open/Create using `emacs' (menu
          `Files->Open File' or simply <^X><^F>) the file `~/.emacs'
          (or, if this fails, `c:/.emacs').

        * Paste the two lines (menu `Edit->Paste' or simply <^Y>)
          into the file and save (menu `Files->Save Buffer' or simply
          <^X><^S>).

        * Exit `emacs' and start it again.


     `emacs' should not report any errors (at least related to Ciao)
     on startup. At this point the `emacs' checks in the following
     section should work.


Checking for correct installation on Win32
==========================================

After the actions and registry changes performed by the installation
procedure, you should check that the following should work correctly:

   * Ciao-related file types (`.pl' source files, `.cpx' executables,
     `.itf,.po,.asr' interface files, `.pls' scripts, etc.) should
     have specific icons associated with them (you can look at the
     files in the folders in the Ciao distribution to check).

   * Double-clicking on the shortcut to `ciaosh'(`.cpx') on the
     desktop should start the typical Prolog-style top-level shell in
     a window. If this shortcut has not been created on the desktop,
     then double-clicking on the `ciaosh'(`.cpx') icon inside the
     `shell' folder within the Ciao source folder should have the
     same effect.

   * In the top-level shell, Ciao library modules should load
     correctly. Type for example `use_module(library(dec10_io)).' at
     the Ciao top-level prompt -you should get back a prompt with no
     errors reported.

   * To exit the top level shell, type `halt.' as usual, or <^D>.


Also, the following documentation-related actions should work:

   * Double-clicking on the shortcut to `ciao'(`.html') which appears
     on the desktop should show the Ciao manual in your default WWW
     browser. If this shortcut has not been created you can
     double-click on the `ciao'(`.html') file in the
     `doc\reference\ciao_html' folder inside the Ciao source folder.
     Make sure you configure your browser to use _style sheets_ for
     correct formatting of the manual (note, however, that some older
     versions of Explorer did not support style sheets well and will
     give better results turning them off).

   * The `doc\reference' folder contains the manual also in the other
     formats present in the distribution, such as `info' (very
     convenient for users of the `emacs' editor/program development
     system) and `postscript' or `pdf', which are specially useful
     for printing. See *note Printing manuals (Win32):: for
     instructions.


Finally, if `emacs' is installed, after starting it (double-clicking
on the `emacs' icon or from the `Start' menu) the following should
work:

   * Typing <^H> <i> (or in the menus `Help->Manuals->Browse Manuals
     with Info') should open a list of manuals in info format in
     which the Ciao manual(s) should appear.

   * When opening a Ciao file, i.e., a file with `.pl' or `.pls'
     ending, using <^X><^F>`filename' (or using the menus) the code
     should appear highlighted according to syntax (e.g., comments in
     red), and `Ciao/Prolog' menus should appear in the menu bar on
     top of the `emacs' window.

   * Loading the file using the `Ciao/Prolog' menu (or typing <^C>
     <l>) should start in another emacs buffer the Ciao toplevel
     shell and load the file. You should now be able to switch the
     the toplevel shell and make queries from within `emacs'.


*Note*: when using `emacs' it is _very convenient_ to swap the
locations of the (normally not very useful) <Caps Lock> key and the
(very useful in `emacs') <Ctrl> key on the keyboard. How to do this
is explained in the `emacs' frequently asked questions FAQs (see the
`emacs' download instructions for their location).

   If you find that everything works but `emacs' cannot start the
Ciao toplevel you may want to check if you can open a normal Windows
shell within `emacs' (just do <M-x> `shell'). If you cannot, it is
possible that you are using some anti-virus software which is causing
problems. See
`http://www.gnu.org/software/emac/windows/faq3.html#anti-virus' for a
workaround.

   In some Windows versions it is possible that you had to change the
_first_ backslashes in the ciao-mode-init.el file in the Ciao
Directory. E.g., assuming you have installed in drive `c:', instances
of `c:\' need to be changed to `c:/'. For example:
`c:\prolog/ciao-1.7p30Win32/shell/ciaosh.bat' should be changed to
`c:/prolog/ciao-1.7p30Win32/shell/ciaosh.bat'.

Compiling the miscellaneous utilities under Windows
===================================================

The `etc' folder contains a number of utilities, documented in the
manual in _PART V - Miscellaneous Standalone Utilities_. In the Win32
distribution these utilities are not compiled by the installation
process. You can create the executable for each of them when needed
by compiling the corresponding `.pl' file.

Server installation under Windows
=================================

If you would like to install Ciao on a server machine, used by
several clients, the following steps are recommended:

   * Follow the standard installation procedure on the server. When
     selecting the folder in which Ciao is installed make sure you
     select a folder that is visible by the client machines. Also
     make sure that the functionality specified in the previous
     sections is now available on the server.

   * Perform a _client installation_ on each client, by running
     (e.g., double-click on it) the `client.bat' script. This should
     update the registry of each client. At this point all the
     functionality should also be available on the clients.


CGI execution under IIS
=======================

The standard installation procedure updates the windows registry so
that Ciao executables (ending in `.cpx') are directly executable as
CGIs under Microsoft's IIS, i.e., so that you make applications
written in Ciao available on the WWW (see the `pillow' library for
specific support for this task). In the event you re-install IIS, you
probably would lose the entries in the registry which allow this. In
that case, processing the file `ciao.reg' produced during the
installation (or simply reinstalling Ciao) will add those entries
again.

Uninstallation under Windows
============================

To uninstall Ciao under Windows, simply delete the directory in which
you put the Ciao distribution. If you also want to delete the
registry entries created by the Ciao installation (not strictly
needed) this must currently be done by hand. The installation leaves
a list of these entries in the file `ciao.reg' to aid in this task.
Also, all the register entries contain the word _ciao_. Thus, to
delete all Ciao entries, run the application `regedit' (for example,
by selecting `Run' from the Windows `Start' menu), search (<^F>) for
_ciao_ in all registry entries (i.e., select all of `Keys', `Values',
and `Data' in the `Edit->Find' dialog), and delete each matching key
(click on the left window to find the matching key for each entry
found).

   %% Local Variables: %% mode: CIAO %% update-version-comments:
"off" %% End:

